---
title: Profiles of Leaders in the RTC Movement
weight: '140'
contenttype: toolkit
date: 2018-12-03T01:07:40.015Z
---
## Tenant Profile: Randy Dillard, NYC Tenant, Member of Community Action for Safe Apartments (CASA)

_Randy Dillard is a resident of the Bronx, and is a single father of 5 children. He has been a CASA member for 6 years and a CASA leader for 4 of those years. Randy has been intricately involved in the city-wide Right to Counsel coalition since 2014. Randy was also appointed to a local community board in the Bronx, is a member of the Bronx Defenders, the National Action Network and he represents CASA on the RTCNYC Steering Committee._

Randy, a single father of 5, joined CASA  after his own confusing and harrowing experience in Housing Court. “I was in court for 2 and a half years. I lost my Section 8 because of...problems with my mailbox... I didn’t receive any mail,” Randy explains. His landlord served him with eviction papers once Section 8 stopped paying their portion of the rent and he was not getting the repairs his apartment desperately needed. “Once the landlord sends you papers—you don’t even know how to begin to read them, how to understand. **You receive another notice telling you to go to housing court, but what is housing court?**” When he arrived at court, it dawned on him that he had seen the aftermath of housing court decisions before: “**I used to see people moving out, but I thought that they were moving...I didn’t know they were being _put_ out**. So when I got to housing court...I stood in that long line and listened to people and said, ‘they’re in the same category that I’m in! They don’t know nothing, they’re just as scared as I was.’”

Going through housing court was a significant burden on Randy and his kids. “My son got arrested because my landlord was a police officer...they threw \[the case] out when they found out he didn’t do what \[the landlord claimed] he did….my daughter was a B student and her grades dropped to Ds and Fs, frightened that we would go to  a shelter. These are all the things that you go through when you don’t have any knowledge of what these landlords do, that’s taking you to court for no apparent reason.” 

After attending a legal clinic and Know Your Rights workshop at Community Action for Safe Apartments (CASA), Randy realized there were many people going through the same things he was and that they were defaulting on their cases without attorney representation. However, Randy says, “I was blessed because I had CASA, and I was blessed because I had an attorney who navigated the court system with me to win my case.  **I don’t want no family to go through what I went through. It was a living hell, a living nightmare, when you know that you can’t protect your children....so that’s why I’m with CASA, and CASA taught me how to advocate.**” Randy notes that the mayoral administration tried increasing funding for tenant representation, but he was a strong advocate in the Coalition, pushing not just for increasing funding but for legislation making it a right. He says, “People can do away with pilot programs, they can defund it. But they can't do away with a law. **Passing Right to Counsel gives tenants the power to organize and not be afraid of their landlord because they know they have an attorney. It was important to us to pass this law as a right.**”

On the implementation of RTC being rooted in the principles of the Coalition, Randy says “moving from a statute to a place where the right is part of our culture is the foundation of all the work we are doing right now.”  Having a right to counsel “can be abstract” for many tenants. To make the right a real source of tenant power, “requires people to know, understand and be able to access the tools they need.” For Randy, the best way to do this is through community organizing.  In this way, the Coalition is moving to create “**a culture shift…where the right to counsel becomes part of the culture.**”

<hr />

## Attorney Profile: Marika Dias, Housing Attorney, Director of Tenant Rights Coalition, Legal Services NYC

_Marika is currently the Director of the Tenant Rights Coalition at Legal Services NYC, a city-wide tenant rights project that partners with tenant organizers and utilizes proactive group litigation and community lawyering strategies to combat displacement and gentrification. Marika also represents Legal Services NYC on the Steering Committee of the Right to Counsel NYC Coalition._

“**When you own the land, you have the power. You have the power to say who stays and who goes.** You have the power to generate immense profit from that land” Marika says.  She points to the history of dispossession, colonization and racist housing policy as the historical and ongoing context for New York City’s current housing landscape. As urban centers around the world over the past few decades have become “the locus for the accumulation of real estate capital. Folks who stand in the way of that, increasingly don’t have a place in this city, and increasingly face the risk of displacement. “**This plays out entirely along racialized lines.**” Working-class communities of color are being displaced and, in New York City, housing court is one of the key places where that displacement is legally enabled.  

Since the win, the nature of housing court needs to evolve to reflect Right to Counsel, including how court personnel perform their roles, the physical layout of housing court itself, and the judges’ handling of cases. “**Everything about the \[housing court] system…has been a systemic response to the fact that on one side of the bar table, the tenant side, there was hardly ever an attorney.  Now that tenants have the right to an attorney, everything about \[housing court] needs to change to reflect that**,” Marika asserts. She goes on to point out how the role of attorneys is shifting as housing court for tenants goes from “a place where I’m not going to get justice” to becoming a place where tenants can expect a “bigger defender system” fighting against all evictions.

 The Coalition is working with law schools to educate new generations of lawyers on this historic right, and it is also working to shift attitudes of active and practicing housing lawyers. Tenant attorneys have historically been part of the system and were accustomed to being gatekeepers in deciding which cases merited representation and which ones did not, which essentially translated to “which tenants are worthy of representation and which are not?” Now that all tenants have a right to representation, tenant attorneys have to get out of the gatekeeper mindset and acknowledge that all tenants deserve representation to defend their homes.  Also as Right to Counsel is phased in and scaled up, the Coalition is focused on ensuring that new tenant attorneys “**understand the history of the tenant rights movement and come into the work as... an ally to that movement … that has required a big culture shift in our own sector.**”
